A-I 801: Foundations of Artificial Intelligence
https://sites.psu.edu/gvwc/course/a-i-801-foundations-artificial-intelligence/
https://www.worldcampus.psu.edu/degrees-and-certificates/penn-state-online-artificial-intelligence-ai-engineering-masters-degree
Course SummaryProspective Students

Course Summary
(3 credits) Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the discipline that attempts to build and understand intelligent entities. Computers with human level intelligence would have a huge impact as intelligent systems with natural language processing, robotics, building networked assistants, speech recognition, and autonomous driving. This course will teach the foundations of AI and give students a practical understanding of the field. This course gives an overview of the core concepts of AI, including the intelligent agents, knowledge and reasoning, reinforcement learning, planning and acting, belief networks, computational learning, and Markov decision process.

Overview


Throughout this course, you will learn to implement AI techniques presented in each lesson, ranging from design of games to implement reinforcement learning procedures via hands-on assignments. You will also have the opportunity to prove your skills by building small projects using AI libraries. This course is a pre-requisite for AI 574: Natural Language Processing.

Course Objectives
The objective of this course is to provide theoretical foundations and hands-on experience in deep learning.  After successfully completing this course, students will be able to:

Demonstrate knowledge of artificial intelligence concepts and techniques.
Identify suitable learning tasks to which these learning techniques can be applied.
Demonstrate understanding of some of the current limitations of artificial intelligence techniques.
Formulate artificial intelligence problems, set up and run computational experiments and evalute results
Reuse common artificial intelligence libraries and packages.
Course Materials
Required Textbooks
Russell, S., Norvig, P. (2021). Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. 4th ed.  Pearson Education. ​(ISBN-13: 978-0-13-461099-3)

OR
Russell, S., Norvig, P. (2010). Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. 3rd ed.  Pearson Education. ​(ISBN-13: 978-0-13-604259-4)

A free PDF version of the 3rd edition is available via Github.  Select this link to access and download a digital copy: Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd ed.  If you’d prefer a physical copy, you may purchase the textbook from a vendor of your choice.

Required Software
Instructions on how to access the required software will be provided in Lesson 2.

Anaconda: https://www.anaconda.com/download/
Jupyter as the web based interactive shell.
PyCharm: As the IDE
Proctored Exams
Proctored Exams- None

Grading and Examinations
Assignment	Points Each	Quantity	Percentage of Final Grade
Assignments	100	12	48%
SEEQ Survey (formerly SRTEs)	100	1	2%
Literature Review	100	1	10%
Final Project	110	1	40%
Grades will be based on the following scale:

A = 94 – 100, A- = 90 – 93, B+ = 87 – 89, B = 84 – 86, B- = 80 – 83, C+ = 77 – 79, C = 70 – 76, D = 60 – 69, and F = 60 and below.

Homework Assignments
Throughout this course you will complete 12 assignments. Each assignment consists of several problems that will assess your understanding of the material presented thus far in the course. Please be sure to complete all parts of each question and upload your completed file to the assignment by the due date indicated in the Course Syllabus..

 Quizzes
There are 12 quizzes related to Python programming. Starting with Lesson 2, each lesson will provide an opportunity to take a quiz to demonstrate your Python skills.  The quizzes are untimed and you’ll have unlimited attempts to take each quiz.  Canvas will keep your highest score regardless of how many times you take the quiz.

 Literature Review
The state of the art literature review is a research assignment related to your project. Your team will have 2 weeks in which to conduct research and write the review.  Any questions should be directed to your instructor.

Final Programming Project
Throughout this course you will work in teams of 2-3 students to create an Artificial Intelligence Project. Please read the Project Description provided in the Student Resources module thoroughly.  Do not hesitate to contact your instructor if you need additional guidance or support.

Please contact your group members and begin discussing the project within the first two weeks of the course. To locate your group, select People from the course navigation menu and click on the Groups tab. Join your assigned group and visit the group homepage. On your group homepage click the People tab to see the names of students in your group.

A Project Proposal and Preliminary Write-Up for your project will be due in Week 5.  Your team will prepare a project proposal and preliminary write-up in a MS Word document (2-3 pages)

The final project will be due at the end of the course and will consist of the deliverables outlined on the Project Description page. Your instructor will create team folders on OneDrive for each group to submit their deliverables.

Course Topics
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence
Python
Problem Solving and Uninformed Search
Informed Searches
Game Playing
Knowledge Based Agents and Propositional Logic
First Order Logic
Knowledge Representation
Uncertainty handling, Probability and Bayes Rule
Learning from Observation and Decision Trees
Markov Decision Process
Bayesian Belief Network
Reinforcement Learning
Prospective Students
For more information on this program, check out the Master of Artificial Intelligence website!