stat 500 info
https://online.stat.psu.edu/statprogram/stat500
https://online.stat.psu.edu/stat500/


About
Credits 3
This graduate level course provides an introduction to the basic concepts of probability, common distributions, statistical methods, and data analysis. It is intended for graduate students who have one undergraduate statistics course and who wish to review the fundamentals before taking additional 500 level statistics courses. This course is cohort-based, which means that there is an established start and end date, and that you will interact with other students throughout the course.

Upon completion of this course students will:

Appreciate and understand the role of statistics in your own field of study.
Develop an ability to apply appropriate statistical methods to summarize and analyze data for some of the more routine experimental settings.
Make sense of data and be able to report the results in appropriate table or statistical terms for inclusion in your thesis or paper.
Perform appropriate statistical techniques using Minitab and interpret the results/outputs.
Course Topics

This graduate level course covers the following topics:

An overview of statistics
Data description: scales of measurement, how to describe data graphically for categorical data (pie chart, bar chart) and graphs for quantitative variables (histogram, stem-and-leaf plot and time plot)
How to describe data by summary statistics: measures of central tendency and variability
How to create a box plot
How to use a statistical package (Minitab)
How probability and probability distributions are involved in statistics
How binomial distributions are involved in statistics
The role that normal distributions play in statistics
Simple random sampling and sampling distribution of sample mean, central limit theorem, normal approximation to the binomial
Differentiation between a population and a sample, how to use a statistic to estimate a population parameter, confidence interval and its interpretation, inferences of population proportion, margin of error and sample size computation
Confidence interval for population mean, Sample size needed for estimating the population mean with a specified confidence level and specified width of the interval
Hypothesis testing: in terms of how to set up Null and Alternative hypotheses, understanding Type I and Type II errors, performing a statistical test for the population mean
How to compute power of a test and choosing the sample size for testing population mean
p-value, how to compute it and how to use it
Inferences about μ with σ unknown: the t-distribution and the assumptions required to check in order to use it
How to compare the mean of two populations for independent samples: using pooled variances t-test versus separate variances t-test
How to compare the mean of two populations for paired data
How to compare two population proportions
Using contingency table and the Chi-square test of independence
Using an F-test to compare the variances of two populations
Understanding concepts related to linear regression models including, least squares method, correlation, Spearman's rank order correlation, inferences about the parameters in the linear regression model
Analyzing data using analysis of variance (ANOVA) methods
Analyzing data using multiple regression methods
Introductory StatisticsApplied StatisticsData AnalysisData DescriptionSummary StatisticsProbabilityConfidence IntervalsHypothesis Testingp-valuesStatistical Inference
Course Author(s)

Dr. Mosuk Chow is the primary author of these course materials with the most recent revision by Dr. Tracey Hammel.

Software
This course will use the statistical software program Minitab. See the Statistical Software page for more information.

 This course uses Honorlock for proctored exams. For more information view O.3 What is a proctored exam? in the student orientation.

A graphing calculator is recommended for this course, especially for students enrolled or considering the MAS program. Otherwise, a basic calculator that includes factorials and combinations will suffice. Please note that for the final exam using a calculator on a device with internet capabilities (e.g. cell phone) will NOT be permitted.

Textbook
Ott, R. L., and Longnecker, M. (2016).  An Introduction to Statistical Methods and Data Analysis, 7th Edition, Cengage Learning. ISBN 13: 978-1-305-26947-7 or ISBN: 978- 0- 357- 67062- 0

Assessment Plan

Homework: Homework assignments will be submitted almost every week. Due dates will be specified in the course calendar.  Doing the homework promptly and carefully is necessary for learning the material. A reasonable amount of collaboration is allowed and encouraged on homework. However, each student must turn in his or her own written work which reflects his or her own understanding of the material. There is penalty for handing in homework late.

Assessments: 2 assessments / quizzes (short exams)

Mid-term Exams: 2 midterm exams 

Final Exam: The final exam will be comprehensive.

PLEASE NOTE: This course may require you to take exams using certain proctoring software that uses your computer’s webcam or other technology to monitor and/or record your activity during exams. The proctoring software may be listening to you, monitoring your computer screen, viewing you and your surroundings, recording and storing any and all activity (including visual and audio recordings) during the proctoring process. By enrolling in this course, you consent to the use of the proctoring software selected by your instructor, including but not limited to any audio and/or visual monitoring which may be recorded. Please contact your instructor with any questions.  (Read more about proctoring...)

About this course
Welcome to the course notes for STAT 500: Applied Statistics. These notes are designed and developed by Penn State’s Department of Statistics and offered as open educational resources. These notes are free to use under Creative Commons license CC BY-NC 4.0.

This course is part of the Online Master of Applied Statistics program offered by Penn State’s World Campus.

Currently enrolled?
If you are a current student in this course, please see Canvas for your syllabus, assignments, lesson videos, and communication from your instructor.

Course Overview
This course provides an introduction to the basic concepts of probability, common distributions, statistical methods, and data analysis. It is intended for graduate students who have one undergraduate statistics course and who wish to review the fundamentals before taking additional 500 level statistics courses. This course is cohort-based, which means that there is an established start and end date, and that you will interact with other students throughout the course.

Check out the STAT 500 Online Sample Syllabus.

Course Goals

Appreciate and understand the role of statistics in your field.
Develop an ability to apply appropriate statistical methods to summarize and analyze data for some of the more routine experimental settings.
Make sense of data and be able to report the results in appropriate tables or statistical terms for inclusion in your thesis or paper.
Interpret results from various computer packages (Minitab, SPSS, SAS) and be able to use Minitab to perform appropriate statistical techniques.
Lessons


0: Overview
Minitab
Population
Parameter
Sample
Population
5/19/26


Collecting and Summarizing Data
Bias
Types of studes
Types of variables
Descriptive statistics
5/19/26


Probability
Probability
Bayes
Set notation
5/19/26


Probability Distributions
Random variables
Expected value
Probability distributions
z-scores
Empirical rule
5/19/26


Sampling Distributions
Sampling distributions
Sample means
Sample proportions
5/19/26


Confidence Intervals
Estimation
Inference
Confidence interval
Population mean
Population proportion
Sample size
5/19/26


Hypothesis Testing
5/19/26


Comparing Two Population Parameters
5/19/26


Chi-Square Test for Independence
5/19/26


Linear Regression Foundations
5/19/26


Introduction to ANOVA
5/19/26


Introduction to Nonparametric Tests and Bootstrap
1/27/26


Summary and Review
5/19/26